<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI: Karwar</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Karwar</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Our Sudder Street party next transferred itself to Karwar on the West Sea coast. Karwar is the headquarters of the Kanara district in the Southern portion of the Bombay Presidency. It is the tract of the Malaya Hills of Sanskrit literature where grow the cardamum creeper and the Sandal Tree. My second brother was then Judge there.</p>
				<p>The little harbour, ringed round with hills, is so secluded that it has nothing of the aspect of a port about it. Its crescent shaped beach throws out its arms to the shoreless open sea like the very image of an eager striving to embrace the infinite. The edge of the broad sandy beach is fringed with a forest of casuarinas, broken at one end by the Kalanadi river which here flows into the sea after passing through a gorge flanked by rows of hills on either side.</p>
				<p>I remember how one moonlit evening we went up this river in a little boat. We stopped at one of Shivaji’s old hill forts, and stepping ashore found our way into the clean-swept little yard of a peasant’s home. We sat on a spot where the moonbeams fell glancing off the top of the outer enclosure, and there dined off the eatables we had brought with us. On our way back we let the boat glide down the river. The night brooded over the motionless hills and forests, and on the silent flowing stream of this little Kalanadi, throwing over all its moonlight spell. It took us a good long time to reach the mouth of the river, so, instead of returning by sea, we got off the boat there and walked back home over the sands of the beach. It was then far into the night, the sea was without a ripple, even the ever-troubled murmur of the casuarinas was at rest. The shadow of the fringe of trees along the vast expanse of sand hung motionless along its border, and the ring of blue-grey hills around the horizon slept calmly beneath the sky.</p>
				<p>Through the deep silence of this illimitable whiteness we few human creatures walked along with our shadows, without a word. When we reached home my sleep had lost itself in something still deeper. The poem which I then wrote is inextricably mingled with that night on the distant seashore. I do not know how it will appeal to the reader apart from the memories with which it is entwined. This doubt led to its being left out of Mohita Babu’s edition of my works. I trust that a place given to it among my reminiscences may not be deemed unfitting.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Let me sink down, losing myself in the depths of midnight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let the Earth leave her hold of me, let her free me from her obstacle of dust.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Keep your watch from afar, O stars, drunk though you be with moonlight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And let the horizon hold its wings still around me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let there be no song, no word, no sound, no touch; nor sleep, nor awakening⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But only the moonlight like a swoon of ecstasy over the sky and my being.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world seems to me like a ship with its countless pilgrims,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Vanishing in the far-away blue of the sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Its sailors’ song becoming fainter and fainter in the air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While I sink in the bosom of the endless night, fading away from myself, dwindling into a point.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>It is necessary to remark here that merely because something has been written when feelings are brimming over, it is not therefore necessarily good. Such is rather a time when the utterance is thick with emotion. Just as it does not do to have the writer entirely removed from the feeling to which he is giving expression, so also it does not conduce to the truest poetry to have him too close to it. Memory is the brush which can best lay on the true poetic colour. Nearness has too much of the compelling about it and the imagination is not sufficiently free unless it can get away from its influence. Not only in poetry, but in all art, the mind of the artist must attain a certain degree of aloofness⁠—the <em>creator</em> within man must be allowed the sole control. If the subject matter gets the better of the creation, the result is a mere replica of the event, not a reflection of it through the Artist’s mind.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
