<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Evening Songs</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>In the state of being confined within myself, of which I have been telling, I wrote a number of poems which have been grouped together, under the title of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heart-Wilderness</i>, in Mohita Babu’s edition of my works. In one of the poems subsequently published in a volume called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Morning Songs</i>, the following lines occur:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p><span>There is a vast wilderness whose name is <em>Heart</em></span>;<br/>
					<span>Whose interlacing forest branches dandle and rock darkness like an infant.</span><br/>
					<span>I lost my way in its depths.</span></p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>from which came the idea of the name for this group of poems.</p>
				<p>Much of what I wrote, when thus my life had no commerce with the outside, when I was engrossed in the contemplation of my own heart, when my imaginings wandered in many a disguise amidst causeless emotions and aimless longings, has been left out of that edition; only a few of the poems originally published in the volume entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Evening Songs</i> finding a place there, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heart-Wilderness</i> group.</p>
				<p>My brother Jyotirindra and his wife had left home travelling on a long journey, and their rooms on the third storey, facing the terraced-roof, were empty. I took possession of these and the terrace, and spent my days in solitude. While thus left in communion with my self alone, I know not how I slipped out of the poetical groove into which I had fallen. Perhaps being cut off from those whom I sought to please, and whose taste in poetry moulded the form I tried to put my thoughts into, I naturally gained freedom from the style they had imposed on me.</p>
				<p>I began to use a slate for my writing. That also helped in my emancipation. The manuscript books in which I had indulged before seemed to demand a certain height of poetic flight, to work up to which I had to find my way by a comparison with others. But the slate was clearly fitted for my mood of the moment. “Fear not,” it seemed to say. “Write just what you please, one rub will wipe all away!”</p>
				<p>As I wrote a poem or two, thus unfettered, I felt a great joy well up within me. “At last,” said my heart, “what I write is my own!” Let no one mistake this for an accession of pride. Rather did I feel a pride in my former productions, as being all the tribute I had to pay them. But I refuse to call the realisation of self, self-sufficiency. The joy of parents in their first-born is not due to any pride in its appearance, but because it is their very own. If it happens to be an extraordinary child they may also glory in that⁠—but that is different.</p>
				<p>In the first flood-tide of that joy I paid no heed to the bounds of metrical form, and as the stream does not flow straight on but winds about as it lists, so did my verse. Before, I would have held this to be a crime, but now I felt no compunction. Freedom first breaks the law and then makes laws which brings it under true Self-rule.</p>
				<p>The only listener I had for these erratic poems of mine was Akshay Babu. When he heard them for the first time he was as surprised as he was pleased, and with his approbation my road to freedom was widened.</p>
				<p>The poems of Vihari Chakravarti were in a 3-beat metre. This triple time produces a rounded-off globular effect, unlike the square-cut multiple of 2. It rolls on with ease, it glides as it dances to the tinkling of its anklets. I was once very fond of this metre. It felt more like riding a bicycle than walking. And to this stride I had got accustomed. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Evening Songs</i>, without thinking of it, I somehow broke off this habit. Nor did I come under any other particular bondage. I felt entirely free and unconcerned. I had no thought or fear of being taken to task.</p>
				<p>The strength I gained by working, freed from the trammels of tradition, led me to discover that I had been searching in impossible places for that which I had within myself. Nothing but want of self-confidence had stood in the way of my coming into my own. I felt like rising from a dream of bondage to find myself unshackled. I cut extraordinary capers just to make sure I was free to move.</p>
				<p>To me this is the most memorable period of my poetic career. As poems my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Evening Songs</i> may not have been worth much, in fact as such they are crude enough. Neither their metre, nor language, nor thought had taken definite shape. Their only merit is that for the first time I had come to write what I really meant, just according to my pleasure. What if those compositions have no value, that pleasure certainly had.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
