<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV: Rajendrahal Mitra</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Rajendrahal Mitra</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>It was about this time that my brother Jyotirindra had the idea of founding a Literary Academy by bringing together all the men of letters of repute. To compile authoritative technical terms for the Bengali language and in other ways to assist in its growth was to be its object⁠—therein differing but little from the lines on which the modern <i xml:lang="bn-Latn">Sahitya Parishat</i>, Academy of Literature, has taken shape.</p>
				<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rajendrahal Mitra took up the idea of this Academy with enthusiasm, and he was eventually its president for the short time it lasted. When I went to invite Pandit Vidyasagar to join it, he gave a hearing to my explanation of its objects and the names of the proposed members, then said: “My advice to you is to leave us out⁠—you will never accomplish anything with big wigs; they can never be got to agree with one another.” With which he refused to come in. Bankim Babu became a member, but I cannot say that he took much interest in the work.</p>
				<p>To be plain, so long as this academy lived Rajendrahal Mitra did everything single-handed. He began with geographical terms. The draft list was made out by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rajendrahal himself and was printed and circulated for the suggestions of the members. We had also an idea of transliterating in Bengali the name of each foreign country as pronounced by itself.</p>
				<p>Pandit Vidyasagar’s prophecy was fulfilled. It did not prove possible to get the big wigs to do anything. And the academy withered away shortly after sprouting. But Rajendrahal Mitra was an all-round expert and was an academy in himself. My labours in this cause were more than repaid by the privilege of his acquaintance. I have met many Bengali men of letters in my time but none who left the impression of such brilliance.</p>
				<p>I used to go and see him in the office of the Court of Wards in Maniktala. I would go in the mornings and always find him busy with his studies, and with the inconsiderateness of youth, I felt no hesitation in disturbing him. But I have never seen him the least bit put out on that account. As soon as he saw me he would put aside his work and begin to talk to me. It is a matter of common knowledge that he was somewhat hard of hearing, so he hardly ever gave me occasion to put him any question. He would take up some broad subject and talk away upon it, and it was the attraction of these discourses which drew me there. Converse with no other person ever gave me such a wealth of suggestive ideas on so many different subjects. I would listen enraptured.</p>
				<p>I think he was a member of the textbook committee and every book he received for approval, he read through and annotated in pencil. On some occasions he would select one of these books for the text of discourses on the construction of the Bengali language in particular or philology in general, which were of the greatest benefit to me. There were few subjects which he had not studied and anything he had studied he could clearly expound.</p>
				<p>If we had not relied on the other members of the Academy we had tried to found, but left everything to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rajendrahal, the present <i xml:lang="bn-Latn">Sahitya Parishat</i> would have doubtless found the matters it is now occupied with left in a much more advanced state by that one man alone.</p>
				<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rajendrahal Mitra was not only a profound scholar, but he had likewise a striking personality which shone through his features. Full of fire as he was in his public life, he could also unbend graciously so as to talk on the most difficult subjects to a stripling like myself without any trace of a patronising tone. I even took advantage of his condescension to the extent of getting a contribution, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Yama’s Dog</i>, from him for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine" xml:lang="bn-Latn">Bharati</i>. There were other great contemporaries of his with whom I would not have ventured to take such liberties, nor would I have met with the like response if I had.</p>
				<p>And yet when he was on the war path his opponents on the Municipal Corporation or the Senate of the University were mortally afraid of him. In those days Kristo Das Pal was the tactful politician, and Rajendrahal Mitra the valiant fighter.</p>
				<p>For the purposes of the Asiatic Society’s publications and researches, he had to employ a number of Sanskrit Pandits to do the mechanical work for him. I remember how this gave certain envious and mean-minded detractors the opportunity of saying that everything was really done by these Pandits while Rajendrahal fraudulently appropriated all the credit. Even today we very often find the tools arrogating to themselves the lion’s share of the achievement, imagining the wielder to be a mere ornamental figurehead. If the poor pen had a mind it would as certainly have bemoaned the unfairness of its getting all the stain and the writer all the glory!</p>
				<p>It is curious that this extraordinary man should have got no recognition from his countrymen even after his death. One of the reasons may be that the national mourning for Vidyasagar, whose death followed shortly after, left no room for a recognition of the other bereavement. Another reason may be that his main contributions being outside the pale of Bengali literature, he had been unable to reach the heart of the people.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
