<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A jingling sentence in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bengali Child's Primer</i>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Exercises in two-syllables. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roofed colonnade or balcony. The writer's family house is an irregular three-storied mass of buildings, which had grown with the joint family it sheltered, built round several courtyards or quadrangles, with long colonnades along the outer faces, and narrower galleries running round each quadrangle, giving access to the single rows of rooms. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The men's portion of the house is the outer; and the women's the inner. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These <i xml:lang="hi">Bustees</i> or settlements consisting of tumbledown hovels, existing side by side with palatial buildings, are still one of the anomalies of Calcutta. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Corresponding to "Wonderland." <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are innumerable renderings of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ramayana</i> in the Indian languages. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A kind of crisp unsweetened pancake taken like bread along with the other courses. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Food while being eaten, and utensils or anything else touched by the hand engaged in conveying food to the mouth, are considered ceremonially unclean. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The writer is the youngest of seven brothers. The sixth brother is here meant. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Obsolete word meaning “bee.” <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lane, a blind one, leads, at right angles to the front verandah, from the public main road to the grounds round the house. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>God of Death. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Goddess of Learning. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Jupiter Pluvius of Hindu mythology. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The King of the Yakshas is the Pluto of Hindu mythology. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Corresponding to Lethe. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Krishna's playground. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Correspondence clerk. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spices wrapped in betel leaf. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is considered sinful for non-brahmins to cast glances on neophytes during the process of their sacred-thread investiture, before the ceremony is complete. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Two novices in the hermitage of the sage Kanva, mentioned in the Sanskrit drama, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Sakuntala</i>. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text for self-realisation. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bards or reciters. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Cow and the Brahmin are watchwords of modern Hindu orthodoxy. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An instrument on which the keynote is strummed to accompany singing. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A large proportion of words in the literary Bengali are derived unchanged from the Sanskrit. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servants call the master and mistress “father,” and “mother,” and the children “brothers” and “sisters.” <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Name of Vishnu in his aspect of slayer of the proud demon, Madhu. <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nirada is a Sanscrit word meaning “cloud,” being a compound of <i xml:lang="hi">nira</i> = water and <i xml:lang="hi">da</i> = giver. In Bengali it is pronounced <i xml:lang="bn">nirode</i>. <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Betel-leaf and spices. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father of the well-known artists Gaganendra and Abanindra. <i>Ed.</i> <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Bengali this word has come to mean an informal uninvited gathering. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Systems of notation were not then in use. One of the most popular of the present-day systems was subsequently devised by the writer's brother here mentioned. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The new bride of the house, wife of the writer's fourth brother, above-mentioned. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may be helpful to the foreign reader to explain that the expert singer of Indian music improvises more or less on the tune outline made over to him by the original composer, so that the latter need not necessarily do more than give a correct idea of such outline. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This would mean "the genius of Bhubanmohini" if that be taken as the author's name. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gifts of cloth for use as wearing apparel are customary by way of ceremonial offerings of affection, respect or seasonable greeting. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The old Vaishnava poets used to bring their name into the last stanza of the poem, this serving as their signature. Bhanu and Rabi both mean the Sun. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The dried and stripped centre-vein of a cocoanut leaf gives a long tapering stick of the average thickness of a match stick, and a bundle of these goes to make the common Bengal household broom which in the hands of the housewife is popularly supposed to be useful in keeping the whole household in order from husband downwards. Its effect on a bare back is here alluded to.—<cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There was a craze for phrenology at the time. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Latterly Sir Tarak Palit, a life-long friend of the writer's second brother. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Saraswati, the goddess of learning, is depicted in Bengal as clad in white and seated among a mass of lotus flowers. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With Indian music it is not a mere question of correctly rendering a melody exactly as composed, but the theme of the original composition is the subject of an improvised interpretative elaboration by the expounding Artist. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="hi">Valmiki Pratibha</i> means the genius of Valmiki. The plot is based on the story of Valmiki, the robber chief, being moved to pity and breaking out into a metrical lament on witnessing the grief of one of a pair of cranes whose mate was killed by a hunter. In the metre which so came to him he afterwards composed his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ramayana</i>. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some Indian classic melodic compositions are designed on a scheme of accentuation, for which purpose the music is set, not to words, but to unmeaning notation-sounds representing drum-beats or plectrum-impacts which in Indian music are of a considerable variety of tone, each having its own sound-symbol. The “Telena” is one such style of composition. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reciters of Puranic legendary lore. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Goddess of Wealth. <a href="chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As distinguished generally from different provincial styles, but chiefly from the Dravidian style prevalent in the South. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many of the Hindustani classic modes are supposed to be best in keeping with particular seasons of the year, or times of the day. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The world, as the Indian boy knows it from fairy tale and folklore, has seven seas and thirteen rivers. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is addressed to Yashoda, mother of Krishna, by his playmates. Yashoda would dress up her darling every morning in his yellow garment with a peacock plume in his hair. But when it came to the point, she was nervous about allowing him, young as he was, to join the other cowherd boys at the pasturage. So it often required a great deal of persuasion before they would be allowed to take charge of him. This is part of the Vaishnava parable of the child aspect of Krishna's play with the world. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A <i xml:lang="hi">Busti</i> is an area thickly packed with shabby tiled huts, with narrow pathways running through, and connecting it with the main street. These are inhabited by domestic servants, the poorer class of artisans and the like. Such settlements were formerly scattered throughout the town even in the best localities, but are now gradually disappearing from the latter. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of Bankim Babu's brothers. <a href="chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The month corresponding to July–August, the height of the rainy season. <a href="chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The month of Aswin corresponds to September–October, the long vacation time for Bengal. <a href="chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Referring to his marriage with the writer's niece, Pratibha. <cite>--<abbr class="eoc">Tr.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
